Returning. A daytime flight returned us to the island. The temperature rose some 10 degrees
from the Sussex we'd left behind and was in the pleasant high 20s. After collecting
the hire car at the airport we drove east on the new National Road, commenting on the
flowering shrubs lining the road and the very green looking olive groves. In the distance
there was still a little snow on the mountain tops but roadside vendors were selling large
bags of potatoes and bunches of small bananas. Time away allowed one to forget what a country
of contrasts Crete was. Within an hour we were parking in the hill village where we
borrowed the completed house from the architect, none packing more luggage than normal because
of our camping ambition. We were met by the estate agent delivering cleaning for us. After
exchanging greetings and news we arranged to go to the office to catch up with Manos.
He was seeing another client but said he would meet us in 20 minutes time at the restaurant
up the road. It was one of our favourites with views over the marina and the bay from
an airy terrace sheltered under a canopy and screened by trees. We caught up with family
news with the owners who were combining catering and social duties with after school childcare
for their energetic children. Manos arrived in good spirits and joined us for something
to eat and drink. He said the project's work was still busy for the business but
the estate agency had quietened down over the winter. He then presented us with a key
to the house. It was fixed with a glossy red key holder with a little white light. It was
good to see him again and we couldn't wait to see the progress on the house. Before setting
off to the village and our house we collected the bags of clothes that had been in the architectural
store room through the winter. Theoretically this was arranged so that we travelled lighter
but we seemed to be accumulating larger and larger wardrobes in Crete. Half an hour later
we were walking through the village down to our house with eager anticipation to see first
hand the work we'd been following so keenly on the internet through the winter and the
earlier part of the year. We were not disappointed. The newly cleaned stone walls were beautiful
and the grey painted shutters and door blended well with the old stones. After opening the
front door with the flash new door key we saw the tiled floor and the new wall and the
door to create the bathroom. We opened the shutters on the new window downstairs to let
more light in. It was hard to work out what features we'd seen before and which ones
we'd committed to memory from the photos Manos had been posting. We were shown around
the tiling. We'd seen the pictures and had made a request for a gaudy-esque effect but
in real life any doubts we had soon went away. Yes they were striking, which was exactly
the phrase I'd first used to him. After seeing the photos at the time he'd said,
Ah you don't like the tiling. Once again we assured him and realised that three of
to stand in the bathroom that we were all worried about the size. It can't be too small,
we are all in it, though as Manos pointed out the WC in the sink hadn't been installed
yet. The architect's creativity was still in full flight. I have been thinking that
there is a small space at the side of the stairs that would lend themselves to a frosted
glass panel that would let some light into the bathroom void area. It would create a
small light well with light from the glass roof hatch. What do you think? We liked the
idea and readily agreed. There were also some glass plates to put on the backs of some of
the stairs for the same reason. We felt confident this would be an interesting bathroom but
the main question was when will it be functional? Going through the rest of the house there
was a lot of new work to examine. We got used to this process following a familiar pattern
with Manos both on site and over the phone. We would say how delighted we were with some
new addition or piece of building work and he would modestly say it was simple or that
the work could have been improved with more room or better craftsmen or by manufacturing
Athens or Italy. Any hesitation on our part was met defensively. You don't like it, we
must change it, it is your house, what colour, size, pattern etc etc. We looked at the show
Chinese used fuse box so different from the jumble of boxes at home under the stairs in
Sussex. It's uniform lines and neat little fuses, some red or green little lights twinkling
behind the neat perspex door fitted into a small niche just outside the house. You don't
like it, you would prefer a grey door to match the woodwork, I'll get it changed. We both
were tested, it's fine, really, you should see our fuse is back home, antiquated. You
want the box to be hidden, the carpenter could make a small wooden cupboard to disguise it,
would you prefer that? No, no, it's lovely, really, we love it, really modern and functional.
Does it work? Ah, the electrician will connect it all tomorrow, the lighting is not on yet,
it's working darkly, don't touch any loose wires. Downstairs was a little congested with
the three of us in an already small space that doubled as a resting place with builders'
tools, tile cutters, toolbox, unused wiring materials, tiles and plumbing materials as
well as some of the old shutters and some new metal plates as well as a rubbish dump
for packing and discarding materials. I was very careful not to touch any loose wires.
Because of his evidence of activity, which we were anxious not to inhibit, it was difficult
to see the new tiles on the ground floor. We liked what we could see, large book-sized
light-coloured stone plates, slightly irregular with a textured surface. The floor was also
punctuated with some large holes, some with metal plates over, partially tiled, some more
alarmingly open. Another next to the new staircase looked dark and deep. That's to the septic
tank, it's deep, said Manos, let's go upstairs. We needed no second bidding but already knew
from the view downstairs through the steel framework to the ceiling upstairs that the
first floor was somewhat conceptual at this stage. In fact, upstairs was more dangerous
than the ground floor. The staircase looked good with stone treads over the metal framework,
it also felt solid, but progress ended quickly as we all three gathered at the top of the
stairs looking across the first floor room. The metalwork frame was still without floorboards
and as a result needed circus skills to negotiate it in full. I restricted myself to walking
across a scaffolding plank to the sparrows staircase leading up to the roof terrace.
Manos quickly followed, don't go on the terrace, another coat of insulation was placed there
this morning and you shouldn't walk on it yet. Sure enough the terrace has now a glossy
grey coat looking like a bumper layer of putty. Empty it was possible to imagine a table and
a seating for six of us dining under the stars one day. Back in the real world Manos showed
me where the terrace walling had been raised and all repointed in white mortar. Reluctantly
he waved at the opening to the terrace where we were standing at the top of the spiral
stairs. This has been a nightmare he groaned. The metal man has not seen eye to eye with
me. It is essential that he is made weather tight. Much into himself it was clear that
this was not a suitable discussion for our first meeting. So I changed the subject and
admired the new narrow long set of windows onto the terrace designed to bring light in
and across the first floor ceiling. For a change he agreed. Yes these have worked out
well and allowed some nice diffused light. Unqualified approval. Unusual. Manos described
the remaining works and his plans. A couple of additions were talked over. The building
permit included a small balcony on the first floor outside the pair of small glass doors.
We had removed it from the first building phase on cost grounds but Manos suggested
completing it while the carpenter was still working at the house. We gave a quick agreement
as we felt it with further opening up the first floor room and allow a sea view without
climbing up to the roof terrace. We were also beginning to think about furniture or at least
storage and fittings. It was agreed that the new cavity created outside the bathroom wall
would house the fridge freezer but there was extra room that could be a store cupboard.
The other thing we noticed was the drop down of stairwell from where the first floor would
be. We began to think that some screen or storage unit might be a practical safety feature.
Talking about this was delayed until after the floor was installed. Of the planning works
the electrician would be coming the next day to finish the fuse panel. The plumber would
connect the bathroom fittings once we had chosen these. This could be done the next
day. The carpenter would put in the first floor as soon as the messy work for the terrace
coating and the roof hatch was complete. It was still all being held up by the hatch.
Additionally, there was all the cleaning, repainting and minor finishing jobs, in some
cases repairing the damage done in the course of completion. This was probably the inevitable
penalty of a cramped workspace. Looking around at everything to be done and the multiple
work in progress areas in the house, camping seemed optimistic but hey this was only day
one and we had another two weeks here yet. Back at the house in the hills we unpacked
and renewed our acquaintances with the neighbours as well as the clothes stored last year. A
walk through the village and an early by Greek standards supper in a village restaurant under
the stars. Plenty of fresh cooked local recipes, a jug of cold wine. Perfect. The next day
we were joined on the terrace for our breakfast by the ginger cat we befriended on earlier
stays. This time she was alone. Last year she brought two young cats with her. After
breakfast we drove to town to meet with the architect to choose bathroom fittings. We
had a look around the town as the arranged meeting was later in the morning. It was bustling
as usual. The Marina car park near the office had introduced yet another revolutionary ticketing
system but the cost remained at three euros for the whole day. We strolled through town,
said hello to a few people we recognised including the architect's mum in her shop. I put credit
on our Greek phone, browsed the bookshop and generally tried to get ourselves into a Cretan
frame of mind for the drive with Manos to the bathroom emporium. In the office it was
the usual mix of good taste, smart furniture, glossy magazines and individual objects. Manos
only had one new challenge for us. He selected some low energy down lighters to be fitted
in the niches but showing one to us he pointed out that the light also came out sideways
and this was not sufficient for them. We need to locate ones that only light downwards and
remains voltage. Let me know the stockist or obtain a sample here on the island or back
in the UK. It appeared this was now our responsibility. Still perhaps this would leave him free to
resolve the hatch dilemma. A new lady computer aided designer was introduced to us and Manos's
dog made her usual low key fuss with her friendly but doleful eyes. Cold drinks were offered
but the usual clamour for Manos's attention from people both residents and visitors plus
the phones meant that he was keen to abandon the office. We followed as did his dog out
into the heat again and negotiated our way out of the town traffic to the bathroom store.
Manos saw the sunroof and several windows were open and the minivan was left in the
canine custody of the dog. We had visited this builder's merchants before. It was on
the outskirts of town in a large building the front of which was a glass fronted showroom
housing swish bathroom fittings most of which were far too large for our purposes. There
was also an impressive range of wall and floor tiles some in glass like jewels. Manos pleased
in and seemed to be known to the man behind one of the desks who waved before a younger
woman engaged him in a machine gun speak Greek conversation. It transpired she was to show
us the small wash basin and taps that she had selected for our wet room. We were led
upstairs to view these. This part of the visit was quite straightforward but it was soon
to degenerate into typical Manos inspired chaos. As far as we could tell there was some
inquiry from Manos about an order for a WC and whether they had papers which described
the dimensions. The conversation became more heated with the woman employing elaborate
hand gestures towards the WCs on display. After more low key Greek shouting the three
of us were led back downstairs to the office where a close examination of the paper filing
system as well as the scrutiny of the PC monitor took place. This must have been quite stressful
as the guy came in from the outside desk to help although his help seemed restricted
to accepting the offer of one of Manos' strong Greek architectural cigarettes which they
both smoked while reviewing some of the paper upside down. Gathering up two steel tape measures
we all reassembled upstairs and started measuring the WCs. The distance out from the wall seemed
to be the key measurement. Unfortunately some of these measurements needed to be compared
with the paper records still downstairs. Fortunately the building was air conditioned.
When we trailed once more upstairs we were led through another door to be confronted
by a version of the closing sequence to the first Indiana Jones film, the scene where
the crated arc is stored away in a vast warehouse of other crates. I exaggerate but only slightly.
The space is about ten times larger than the showroom and full of crates and large cardboard
boxes. Manos and the woman scuttled down the aisles examining the Greek writing in numbers
in some quest to locate a particular item. We hung around as confused bystanders until
some consensus had arrived over whether they had found what they were looking for. We reconvened
downstairs in the office relieved to see the smoking hadn't allowed the paperwork to
combust. After a brief conversation Manos announced it was time to go and the WC had
been selected. Did we want to try it? Sitting in my shorts on a WC in a mercifully quiet
showroom certainly didn't figure as one of my least embarrassing experiences. Still we'd
apparently saved some 150 euros over a previously identified compact one. We were a bit mystified
but reassured by Manos who stated that the plumber could now proceed. Later the same
day two events occurred. We were able to switch on the lights in the house for the
first time and Greek TV announced the country's first case of Mexican swine flu. The events
were unconnected as far as we were aware. Wednesday found us up early shopping near
the harbour at the weekly market. It wasn't long before I had to restrain Stephanie. Stop
I don't think I can carry any more. How much did we spend? Apparently less than ten euros
and that included a four euro jar of honey. We had a large bag of mixed sweet peppers,
artichokes, aubergines, big beef tomatoes, a big bag of beautiful yellow potatoes and
plenty of other things. After dropping the supplies back at the village house we drove
over to review building progress. Manos was already there talking to the back of the plumber
who was working on the pumps in the cavities under the ground floor. Most of this system
seemed quite mysterious to me but it seemed to be one of those areas you just had to trust
the experts. The plumbing was most effective in the loan house so evidence appeared to
be supportive of this action. The plumber broke off to shake hands and lead us into
the tiny bathroom where amazingly the WC was plumbed in. This was the one that was the
subject of so much discussion only yesterday. We agreed the positions of the basin and the
shower and diplomatically withdrew to let him get on with it. Later that day whilst
trying to drive to a local viewpoint we came across an abandoned village and I couldn't
help noticing that most of the houses resembled the house during the last visit. Walls are
bare stone, no roofs, gaping holes instead of shutters. There had been progress on the
project, slow progress but progress nevertheless. That evening we arranged a visit to the south
of the island for later in the week to meet up with an old friend who is now the proud
owner of a building plot full of stones with spectacular views. At least it would allow
the architectonists and the builders to make progress or conduct convoluted discussions
with local builders merchants without our assistance.